Announcement blogpost for the 1.17 release (#618)
apache/flink-web: docs/content/posts/2023-03-09-release-1.17.0.md

companies. Thanks to our excellent community and contributors, Apache Flink
continues to grow as a technology and remains one of the most active projects in
the Apache Software Foundation. Flink 1.17 had 173 contributors enthusiastically
participating and saw the completion of 7 FLIPs and 600+ issues, bringing many
exciting new features and improvements to the community.

# Towards Streaming Warehouses

In order to achieve greater efficiency in the realm of [streaming
warehouse](https://www.alibabacloud.com/blog/more-than-computing-a-new-era-led-by-the-warehouse-architecture-of-apache-flink_598821),
Flink 1.17 contains substantial improvements to both the performance of batch
processing and the semantics of streaming processing. These improvements
represent a significant stride towards the creation of a more efficient and
streamlined data warehouse, capable of processing large quantities of data in
real-time.

For batch processing, this release includes several new features and
improvements:

* **Streaming Warehouse API:**
  [FLIP-282](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/pages/viewpage.action?pageId=235838061)

>   introduces the new Delete and Update API in Flink SQL which works in batch

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  introduces the new Delete and Update API in Flink SQL which works (only) in batch
```
Without going through the FLIP in detail: Is it a feature that "only" works in batch mode. Or does it also work in streaming mode. If the latter is the case, we could either write "in batch and streaming" or remove this remark to make things clearer.

  mode. External storage systems like Flink Table Store can implement row-level
  updates via this new API. The ALTER TABLE syntax is enhanced by including the
  ability to ADD/MODIFY/DROP columns, primary keys, and watermarks, making it
  easier for users to maintain their table schema.
* **Batch Execution Improvements:** Execution of batch workloads has been

>   significantly improved in Flink 1.17, in terms of performance, stability and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  significantly improved in Flink 1.17 in terms of performance, stability and
```

  usability. Performance wise, a 26% TPC-DS improvement is achieved with
  strategy and operator optimizations, such as new join reordering and adaptive
  local hash aggregation, Hive aggregate functions improvements, and the hybrid
  shuffle mode enhancements. Stability wise, speculative execution now supports
  all operators, and the adaptive batch scheduler is more robust against data
  skew. Usability wise, the tuning effort required for batch workloads has been

>   reduced. The adaptive batch scheduler is now the default, the hybrid shuffle

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  reduced. The adaptive batch scheduler is now the default scheduler in batch mode. The hybrid shuffle
```
Just as a suggestion to be more precise...

>   all operators, and the adaptive batch scheduler is more robust against data
>   skew. Usability wise, the tuning effort required for batch workloads has been
>   reduced. The adaptive batch scheduler is now the default, the hybrid shuffle
>   is compatible with speculative execution and the adaptive batch scheduler,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  all operators, and the Adaptive Batch Scheduler is more robust against data
  skew. Usability wise, the tuning effort required for batch workloads has been
  reduced. The Adaptive Batch Scheduler is now the default, the hybrid shuffle
  is compatible with speculative execution and the Adaptive Batch Scheduler,
```
nit: To align the casing with how we use it in the Adaptive Batch Scheduler section below

to isolate the produced data of different attempts of the same subtask, even if
the attempts are running at the same time. The _FinalizeOnMaster_ interface is
also improved so that OutputFormat sinks can see which attempts are finished and
then properly commit the written data. Once a sink can work well with concurrent
attempts, it can implement the decorative interface
[SupportsConcurrentExecutionAttempts](https://github.com/apache/flink/blob/master//flink-core/src/main/java/org/apache/flink/api/common/SupportsConcurrentExecutionAttempts.java)
so that speculative execution is allowed to be performed on it. Some built in
sinks are enabled to do speculative execution, including DiscardingSink,
PrintSinkFunction, PrintSink, FileSink, FileSystemOutputFormat and
HiveTableSink.

The slow task detection is improved for speculative execution. Previously, it
only considered the execution time of tasks when deciding which tasks are slow.
It now takes the input data volume of tasks into account. Tasks which have a
longer execution time but consume more data may not be considered as slow. This
improvement helps to eliminate the negative impacts of data skew on slow task

> detecting.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
detection.
```
nit

## Adaptive Batch Scheduler

Adaptive Batch Scheduler is now used for batch jobs by default. This scheduler
can automatically decide a proper parallelism of each job vertex, based on how
much data the vertex processes. It is also the only scheduler which supports
speculative execution.

The configuration of Adaptive Batch Scheduler is improved for ease of use. Users
no longer need to explicitly set the global default parallelism to -1 to enable
automatically deciding parallelism. Instead, the global default parallelism, if
set, will be used as the upper bound when deciding parallelism. The keys of
Adaptive Batch Scheduler configuration options are also renamed to be easier to
understand. 

The capabilities of Adaptive Batch Scheduler are also improved. It now supports
evenly distributing data to downstream tasks, based on fine-grained data
distribution information. The limitation that the decided parallelism of

> vertices can only be a power of 2 is is no longer needed and therefore removed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
vertices can only be a power of 2 is no longer needed and therefore removed.
```

## Hybrid Shuffle Mode

Various important improvements for the Hybrid Shuffle mode are available in this
release.

* Hybrid Shuffle Mode now supports Adaptive Batch Scheduler and Speculative
  Execution.
* Hybrid Shuffle Mode now supports reusing intermediate data when possible,
  which brings significant performance improvement.
* The stability is improved to avoid stability issues in large scale production.

More details can be found at the
[Hybrid-Shuffle](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.17/docs/ops/batch/batch_shuffle/#hybrid-shuffle)
section.

## TPC-DS Benchmark

Starting with Flink 1.16, the performance of the Batch engine has continuously
been optimized. In Flink 1.16, dynamic partition pruning was introduced, but not
all TPC-DS queries could be optimized. In Flink 1.17, the algorithm has been
improved, and most of the TPC-DS results are now optimized. In Flink 1.17, a
dynamic programming join-reorder algorithm is introduced, which has a better
working, larger search space compared to the previous algorithm.. The planner
can automatically select the appropriate join-reorder algorithm based on the

> number of joins in a query, so that users don’t have to care about the join
> reorder algorithms. (Note: the join-reorder is disabled by default, and you need

Reviewer: ```suggestion
number of joins in a query, so that users don’t have to care about the join-reorder 
algorithms. (Note: the join-reorder is disabled by default, and you need
```
nit: just for the sake of consistency :innocent:

performance improvement compared to Flink 1.16.

<center>
<img src="/img/blog/2023-03-09-release-1.17.0/tpc-ds-benchmark.png" style="width:90%;margin:15px">
</center>
<!-- FIXME: Change to the actual release date -->

## SQL Client / Gateway

Apache Flink 1.17 introduces a new feature called "gateway mode" for the SQL
Client, which enhances its functionality by allowing it to connect to a remote
gateway and submit SQL queries like it does in embedded mode. This new mode
offers users much more convenience when working with the SQL Gateway.

In addition, the SQL Client/SQL Gateway now provides new support for managing
job lifecycles through SQL statements. Users can use SQL statements to display
all job information stored in the JobManager and stop running jobs using their
unique job IDs. With this new feature, SQL Client/Gateway now has almost the
same functionality as Flink CLI, making it another powerful tool for managing
Flink jobs.

## SQL API

Row-Level SQL Delete & Update are becoming more and more important in modern big
data workflows. The use cases include deleting a set of rows for regulatory
compliance, updating a set of rows for data correction, etc. Many popular

> engines such as Trino, Hive have supported them. In Flink 1.17, the new Delete &

Reviewer: ```suggestion
engines such as Trino or Hive have supported them. In Flink 1.17, the new Delete &
```

> Update API is introduced in Flink, which works in batch mode and is exposed to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Update API is introduced in Flink, which works in (only) batch mode and is exposed to
```
Here, I would also prefer to be more specific if it's only supported in batch mode. If that's supported by both modes, "which works in batch (besides streaming) mode and [...]" would be an option.

newly written files in batch mode as well. This feature can greatly reduce the
number of small files and improve reading performance. Also, for using Hive
built-in functions via
[HiveModule](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.17/docs/connectors/table/hive/hive_functions/),
Flink introduces several native Hive aggregation functions including
SUM/COUNT/AVG/MIN/MAX to HiveModule. These functions can be executed using the
hash-based aggregation operator and then bring significant performance
improvement.

# Streaming Processing

In Flink 1.17, difficult Streaming SQL semantics and correctness issues are
addressed, checkpoint performance is optimized, Streaming FileSink expands ABFS
support,  Calcite and FRocksDB have been upgraded to newer versions. This
further consolidates our leading position in the field of stream processing.

## Streaming SQL Semantics

In terms of correctness and semantic enhancement, Flink 1.17 introduces the
experimental feature
[PLAN_ADVICE](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.17/docs/dev/table/sql/explain/#explaindetails)
that detects potential correctness risks and provides optimization suggestions.

> For example, If a [NDU (Non-deterministic

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, if a [NDU (Non-deterministic
```

```
== Optimized Physical Plan With Advice ==
...
advice[1]: [ADVICE] You might want to enable local-global two-phase optimization by configuring ('table.optimizer.agg-phase-strategy' to 'AUTO').
```

In addition, Flink 1.17 resolved several incorrect plan optimizations which led
to incorrect results reported in
[FLINK-29849](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-29849),
[FLINK-30006](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-30006), and
[FLINK-30841](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-30841).

## Checkpoint Improvements 

Generic Incremental Checkpoint (GIC) aims to improve the speed and stability of
the checkpoint procedure. Some experimental results in the WordCount case are
shown as below. More details can be found in this [blog
post](https://www.ververica.com/blog/generic-log-based-incremental-checkpoint). 

Table1: Benefits after enabling GIC in WordCount case

<center>
<img src="/img/blog/2023-03-09-release-1.17.0/beneifts-after-enabling-gic-in-wordcount-case.png" style="width:90%;margin:15px">
</center>
<!-- FIXME: Change to the actual release date -->

Table2: Costs after enabling GIC in WordCount case

<center>

> <img src="/img/blog/2023-03-09-release-1.17.0/costs-after-enabling-gic-in-wordcount-case.png" style="width:90%;margin:15px">

Reviewer: Not sure whether that's worth the effort, but: The "Full Checkpoint Size" column header is not bold. Why not use the hugo table here instead?

Author: 😭，Let me try to bold the header

Author: done

</center>
<!-- FIXME: Change to the actual release date -->

Unaligned Checkpoints (UC) greatly increase the completed ratio of checkpoints

> under backpressure. Previous UC will write many small files which may cause high

Reviewer: ```suggestion
under backpressure. The previous UC implementation would write many small files which may cause high
```
nit

is now able to function in streaming mode with a total of five different
filesystems: HDFS, S3, OSS, ABFS, and Local. This expansion effectively covers
the majority of main filesystems, providing a comprehensive range of options and
increased versatility for users.

## RocksDBStateBackend Upgrade

This release has updated the version of
[FRocksDB](https://github.com/ververica/frocksdb) to 6.20.3-ververica-2.0 which
brings improvements for RocksDBStateBackend:

1. Support build FRocksDB Java on Apple Silicon chipsets, such as Mac M1 and M2.
2. Improve the performance of compaction filter by avoiding expensive ToString()
3. Upgrade ZLIB version of FRocksDB to avoid memory corruption
4. Add periodic_compaction_seconds option to RocksJava

Please see [FLINK-30836](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-30836) for
more details.

This release also widens the scope of sharing memory between slots to
TaskManager, which can help to increase the memory efficiency if the memory
usage of slots in a TaskManager is uneven. Furthermore, it can reduce the
overall memory consumption at the expense of resource isolation after tuning.
Read more about

> [tate-backend-rocksdb-memory-fixed-per-tm](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.17/docs/deployment/config/#state-backend-rocksdb-memory-fixed-per-tm)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[state.backend.rocksdb.memory.fixed-per-tm](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.17/docs/deployment/config/#state-backend-rocksdb-memory-fixed-per-tm)
```

configuration. 

## Calcite Upgrade

Flink 1.17 is upgraded to [Calcite](https://calcite.apache.org/) version 1.29.0
to improve the performance and efficiency of the Flink SQL system. Flink 1.16
uses Calcite 1.26.0 which has severe issues with RexNode simplification caused
by the SEARCH operator. This leads to wrong data from query optimization as

> reported in[CALCITE-4325](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/CALCITE-4325),[

Reviewer: ```suggestion
reported in [CALCITE-4325](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/CALCITE-4325) and [
```

CALCITE-4352](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/CALCITE-4352). By upgrading

> to the latest version of Calcite, Flink can take advantage of its improved

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the version of Calcite, Flink can take advantage of its improved
```
We haven't upgraded to the latest version (, yet).

performance and new features in Flink SQL processing. This resolves multiple
bugs and leads to faster query processing times. The downside of this upgrade is
that the execution plan changes for certain SQL queries. Savepoints are not
backwards compatible in these cases. 

# Others

## PyFlink

The Flink 1.17 release includes updates to PyFlink, the Python interface for
Apache Flink. Notable improvements include support for Python 3.10 and execution
capabilities on Apple Silicon chipsets, such as the Mac M1 and M2 computers.
Additionally, the release includes minor optimizations that enhance
cross-process communication stability between Java and Python processes, enable
the specification of data types of Python UDFs via strings to improve usability,
and support access to job parameters in Python UDFs. This release focuses on
improving PyFlink's functionality and usability, rather than introducing new
major features. However, these enhancements are expected to improve the user
experience and facilitate efficient data processing.

## Daily Performance Benchmark 

In Flink 1.17, daily performance monitoring has been integrated into the

> #flink-dev-benchmarks Slack channel. This feature is crucial in quickly

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[#flink-dev-benchmarks Slack channel](https://apache-flink.slack.com/archives/C0471S0DFJ9). This feature is crucial in quickly
```

identifying regressions and ensuring the quality of the code. Once a regression
is identified through the Slack channel or the [speed
center](http://codespeed.dak8s.net:8000), developers can refer to the guidance
provided in the [Benchmark's
wiki](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/pages/viewpage.action?pageId=115511847)
to address the issue effectively. This feature helps the community take a
proactive approach to ensuring system performance, resulting in a better product
and increased user satisfaction.

> ## Subtask Level Flame Graph

Reviewer: Just as an idea: It might be nice to add a screenshot of that feature to the end of this section. :thinking:

Author: nice idea, will add a picture

the task level, which allows users to gain a more detailed understanding of the
performance of their tasks. This feature is a significant improvement over
previous versions of Flame Graph, as it empowers users to select a subtask of
interest and see the corresponding flame graph. By doing so, users can identify
specific areas where their tasks may be experiencing performance issues and take
steps to address them. This can lead to significant improvements in the overall
efficiency and effectiveness of their data processing pipelines.

## Generalized Delegation Token Support

Previously, Flink supported Kerberos authentication and Hadoop based tokens.
With
[FLIP-272](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/FLINK/FLIP-272%3A+Generalized+delegation+token+support)
being finalized, Flink’s delegation token framework is generalized to make it
authentication protocol agnostic. This will allow contributors in the future
to add support for non-hadoop compliant frameworks where the authentication
protocol is not based on Kerberos. Additionally, 
[FLIP-211](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/FLINK/FLIP-211%3A+Kerberos+delegation+token+framework)

> was implemented which improves Flink interactions with Kerberos. It reduces

Reviewer: ```suggestion
was implemented which improves Flink's interactions with Kerberos: It reduces
```
nitty thing on my own paragraph :innocent:

the number of requests that are necessary to exchange delegation tokens in Flink.

# Upgrade Notes

> Striving to ensure that upgrades are as seamless as can be. However, certain

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Flink community tries to ensure that upgrades are as seamless as can be. However, certain
```
Isn't the subject missing in this sentence? ...or is it my English? :thinking:

Author: In fact, I used chatGpt in professional tone, maybe the model is not good enough, thus I choose to believe your English

  Batch Scheduler, next to various configuration simplifications.
* **SQL Client/Gateway:** Apache Flink 1.17 introduces the "gateway mode" for
  SQL Client, allowing users to submit SQL queries to a SQL Gateway for enhanced
  functionality. Users can use SQL statements to manage job lifecycles,
  including displaying job information and stopping running jobs.  This provides
  a powerful tool for managing Flink jobs.

For stream processing, the following features and improvements are realized:

* **Streaming SQL Semantics:** Non-deterministic operations may bring incorrect
  results or exceptions which is a challenging topic in streaming SQL. Incorrect
  optimization plans and functional issues have been fixed, and the experimental
  feature of [PLAN_ADVICE](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.17/docs/dev/table/sql/explain/#explaindetails)
  is introduced to inform of potential correctness risks and optimization
  suggestions to SQL users.
* **Checkpoint Improvements:** The generic incremental checkpoint improvements
  enhance the speed and stability of the checkpoint procedure, and the unaligned

>   checkpoint has improved  stability under backpressure and is production-ready

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  checkpoint has improved stability under backpressure and is production-ready
```

  checkpoint types while a job is running with the newly introduced REST
  interface for triggering checkpoints.
* **Watermark Alignment Enhancement:** Efficient watermark processing directly
  affects the execution efficiency of event time applications. In Flink 1.17,
  [FLIP-217](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/FLINK/FLIP-217%3A+Support+watermark+alignment+of+source+splits)
  introduces an improvement to watermark alignment by aligning data emission
  across splits within a source operator. This improvement results in more
  efficient coordination of watermark progress in the source, which in turn
  mitigates excessive buffering by downstream operators and enhances the overall
  efficiency of steaming job execution.
* **StateBackend Upgrade:** The updated version of
  [FRocksDB](https://github.com/ververica/frocksdb) to 6.20.3-ververica-2.0
  brings improvements to RocksDBStateBackend like sharing memory between slots,
  and now supports Apple Silicon chipsets like the Mac M1.

# Batch processing

As a unified stream and batch data processing engine, Flink stands out
particularly in the field of stream processing. In order to improve its batch

> processing capabilities, the community contributors put in a lot of effort to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
processing capabilities, the community contributors put in a lot of effort in
```

> improve Flink's batch performance and ecosystem in version 1.17. This makes it

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
improving Flink's batch performance and ecosystem in version 1.17. This makes it
```

easier for users to build a streaming warehouse based on Flink.

## Speculative Execution

Speculative execution for sinks is now supported. Previously, speculative
execution was not enabled for sinks to avoid instability or incorrect results.

> In Flink 1.17, the context of sinks are improved so that sinks, including [new

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In Flink 1.17, the context of sinks is improved so that sinks, including [new
```

sinks](https://github.com/apache/flink/blob/master//flink-core/src/main/java/org/apache/flink/api/connector/sink2/Sink.java)
and [OutputFormat

> sinks](https://github.com/apache/flink/blob/master//flink-core/src/main/java/org/apache/flink/api/common/io/OutputFormat.java),

Reviewer 3: The same suggestion for link here.

are aware of the number of attempts. With the number of attempts, sinks are able
to isolate the produced data of different attempts of the same subtask, even if
the attempts are running at the same time. The _FinalizeOnMaster_ interface is
also improved so that OutputFormat sinks can see which attempts are finished and
then properly commit the written data. Once a sink can work well with concurrent
attempts, it can implement the decorative interface

> [SupportsConcurrentExecutionAttempts](https://github.com/apache/flink/blob/master//flink-core/src/main/java/org/apache/flink/api/common/SupportsConcurrentExecutionAttempts.java)

Reviewer 3: The same suggestion for code link here.

so that speculative execution is allowed to be performed on it. Some built in
sinks are enabled to do speculative execution, including DiscardingSink,
PrintSinkFunction, PrintSink, FileSink, FileSystemOutputFormat and
HiveTableSink.

The slow task detection is improved for speculative execution. Previously, it
only considered the execution time of tasks when deciding which tasks are slow.
It now takes the input data volume of tasks into account. Tasks which have a
longer execution time but consume more data may not be considered as slow. This

> improvement helps to eliminate the negative impacts of data skew on slow task

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
improvement helps to eliminate any negative impact from data skew on slow task
```

Author: The scope of `Any`   may beyond the fact

detection.

## Adaptive Batch Scheduler

Adaptive Batch Scheduler is now used for batch jobs by default. This scheduler

> can automatically decide a proper parallelism of each job vertex, based on how

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
can automatically decide a proper parallelism for each job vertex, based on how
```

Author: `parallelism of each job vertex` should be ok

much data the vertex processes. It is also the only scheduler which supports
speculative execution.

The configuration of Adaptive Batch Scheduler is improved for ease of use. Users
no longer need to explicitly set the global default parallelism to -1 to enable
automatically deciding parallelism. Instead, the global default parallelism, if

> set, will be used as the upper bound when deciding parallelism. The keys of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
set, will be used as the upper bound when deciding the parallelism. The keys of
```

Adaptive Batch Scheduler configuration options are also renamed to be easier to
understand. 

The capabilities of Adaptive Batch Scheduler are also improved. It now supports
evenly distributing data to downstream tasks, based on fine-grained data
distribution information. The limitation that the decided parallelism of
vertices can only be a power of 2 is no longer needed and therefore removed.

## Hybrid Shuffle Mode

Various important improvements to the Hybrid Shuffle mode are available in this
release.

* Hybrid Shuffle Mode now supports Adaptive Batch Scheduler and Speculative
  Execution.
* Hybrid Shuffle Mode now supports reusing intermediate data when possible,

>   which brings significant performance improvement.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  which brings significant performance improvements.
```

* The stability is improved to avoid stability issues in large scale production.

More details can be found at the
[Hybrid-Shuffle](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.17/docs/ops/batch/batch_shuffle/#hybrid-shuffle)

> section.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
section of the documentation.
```

## TPC-DS Benchmark

Starting with Flink 1.16, the performance of the Batch engine has continuously
been optimized. In Flink 1.16, dynamic partition pruning was introduced, but not
all TPC-DS queries could be optimized. In Flink 1.17, the algorithm has been
improved, and most of the TPC-DS results are now optimized. In Flink 1.17, a
dynamic programming join-reorder algorithm is introduced, which has a better
working, larger search space compared to the previous algorithm.. The planner
can automatically select the appropriate join-reorder algorithm based on the

> number of joins in a query, so that users don’t have to care about the join-reorder 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
number of joins in a query, so that users no longer need to care about the join-reorder 
```

algorithms. (Note: the join-reorder is disabled by default, and you need
to enable it when running TPC-DS.) In the operator layer, dynamic hash local
aggregation strategy is introduced, which can dynamically determine according to
the data distribution whether the local hash aggregation operation is needed to
improve performance. In the runtime layer, some unnecessary virtual function

> calls are removed to speed up the execution. Summarized, Flink 1.17 has a 26%

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
calls are removed to speed up the execution. To summarize, Flink 1.17 has a 26%
```

> performance improvement compared to Flink 1.16 on 10T dataset for partitioned

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
performance improvement compared to Flink 1.16 on a 10T dataset for partitioned
```

> table.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
tables.
```

connectors. Now external storage systems can implement row-level updates via
this new API. Furthermore, the ALTER TABLE syntax is extended to include the
ability to ADD/MODIFY/DROP columns, primary keys, and watermarks. These enhanced
capabilities provide users with the flexibility to maintain their table schema
metadata according to their needs.

## Hive Compatibility

Apache Flink 1.17 brings new improvements to the Hive table sink, making it more
efficient than ever before. In previous versions, the Hive table sink only
supported automatic file compaction in streaming mode, but not in batch mode. In
Flink 1.17, the Hive table sink can now automatically compact newly written files
in batch mode as well. This feature can greatly reduce the number of small files.
Also, for using Hive built-in functions via
[HiveModule](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.17/docs/connectors/table/hive/hive_functions/),
Flink introduces several native Hive aggregation functions including
SUM/COUNT/AVG/MIN/MAX to HiveModule. These functions can be executed using the
hash-based aggregation operator and then bring significant performance

> improvement.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
improvements.
```

# Streaming Processing

In Flink 1.17, difficult Streaming SQL semantics and correctness issues are
addressed, checkpoint performance is optimized, watermark alignment is enhanced,

> Streaming FileSink expands ABFS support,  Calcite and FRocksDB have been upgraded

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Streaming FileSink expands ABFS support, Calcite and FRocksDB have been upgraded
```

to newer versions. This further consolidates our leading position in the field
of stream processing.

## Streaming SQL Semantics

In terms of correctness and semantic enhancement, Flink 1.17 introduces the
experimental feature
[PLAN_ADVICE](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.17/docs/dev/table/sql/explain/#explaindetails)
that detects potential correctness risks and provides optimization suggestions.
For example, if a [NDU (Non-deterministic
Updates)](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-master/docs/dev/table/concepts/determinism/#3-determinism-in-streaming-processing)
issue is detected by EXPLAIN PLAN_ADVICE, the optimizer will append the advice

> at the end of the physical plan, the optimizer will tag the advice id to the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
at the end of the physical plan, the optimizer will then tag the advice id to the
```

[FLINK-30006](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-30006), and
[FLINK-30841](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-30841).

## Checkpoint Improvements 

Generic Incremental Checkpoint (GIC) aims to improve the speed and stability of
the checkpoint procedure. Some experimental results in the WordCount case are
shown as below. More details can be found in this [blog
post](https://www.ververica.com/blog/generic-log-based-incremental-checkpoint). 

Table1: Benefits after enabling GIC in WordCount case

<center>
<img src="/img/blog/2023-03-09-release-1.17.0/beneifts-after-enabling-gic-in-wordcount-case.png" style="width:90%;margin:15px">
</center>
<!-- FIXME: Change to the actual release date -->

Table2: Costs after enabling GIC in WordCount case

<center>
<img src="/img/blog/2023-03-09-release-1.17.0/costs-after-enabling-gic-in-wordcount-case.png" style="width:90%;margin:15px">
</center>
<!-- FIXME: Change to the actual release date -->

Unaligned Checkpoints (UC) greatly increase the completed ratio of checkpoints
under backpressure. The previous UC implementation would write many small files which may cause high

> load for the namenode of HDFS. In this release this problem is resolved to make

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
load for the namenode of HDFS. In this release, this problem is resolved to make
```

UC more usable in the production environment.

In 1.17, a [REST
API](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.17/docs/ops/rest_api/#jobs-jobid-checkpoints-1)

> is provided so that users can manually trigger checkpoints with self-defined

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
is provided so that users can manually trigger checkpoints with a self-defined
```

checkpoint type while a job is running. For example, for a job running with

> incremental checkpoint, users can trigger a full checkpoint periodically or

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
incremental checkpoints, users can trigger a full checkpoint periodically or
```

Author: incremental checkpoint should be ok， it means a checkpoint type

Additionally, the release includes minor optimizations that enhance
cross-process communication stability between Java and Python processes, enable
the specification of data types of Python UDFs via strings to improve usability,
and support access to job parameters in Python UDFs. This release focuses on
improving PyFlink's functionality and usability, rather than introducing new
major features. However, these enhancements are expected to improve the user
experience and facilitate efficient data processing.

## Daily Performance Benchmark 

In Flink 1.17, daily performance monitoring has been integrated into the
[#flink-dev-benchmarks Slack channel](https://apache-flink.slack.com/archives/C0471S0DFJ9). This feature is crucial in quickly
identifying regressions and ensuring the quality of the code. Once a regression
is identified through the Slack channel or the [speed
center](http://codespeed.dak8s.net:8000), developers can refer to the guidance
provided in the [Benchmark's
wiki](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/pages/viewpage.action?pageId=115511847)
to address the issue effectively. This feature helps the community take a

> proactive approach to ensuring system performance, resulting in a better product

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
proactive approach in ensuring system performance, resulting in a better product
```

Starting with Flink 1.17, Flame Graph provides "drill down" visualizations to
the task level, which allows users to gain a more detailed understanding of the
performance of their tasks. This feature is a significant improvement over
previous versions of Flame Graph, as it empowers users to select a subtask of
interest and see the corresponding flame graph. By doing so, users can identify
specific areas where their tasks may be experiencing performance issues and take
steps to address them. This can lead to significant improvements in the overall
efficiency and effectiveness of their data processing pipelines.

<center>
<img src="/img/blog/2023-03-09-release-1.17.0/subtask-level-flame-graph.png" style="width:90%;margin:15px">
</center>
<!-- FIXME: Change to the actual release date -->

## Generalized Delegation Token Support

Previously, Flink supported Kerberos authentication and Hadoop based tokens.
With
[FLIP-272](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/FLINK/FLIP-272%3A+Generalized+delegation+token+support)
being finalized, Flink’s delegation token framework is generalized to make it
authentication protocol agnostic. This will allow contributors in the future

> to add support for non-hadoop compliant frameworks where the authentication

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to add support for non-Hadoop compliant frameworks where the authentication
```

protocol is not based on Kerberos. Additionally, 
[FLIP-211](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/FLINK/FLIP-211%3A+Kerberos+delegation+token+framework)
was implemented which improves Flink's interactions with Kerberos: It reduces
the number of requests that are necessary to exchange delegation tokens in Flink.

# Upgrade Notes

> The Flink community tries to ensure that upgrades are as seamless as can be. However, certain

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Flink community tries to ensure that upgrades are as seamless as possible. However, certain
```

changes may require users to make adjustments to certain parts of the program

> when upgrading to version 1.17. Please refer to the release notes for a

Reviewer 4: Please add link to the "release notes", this should be a deterministic URL `https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.17/release-notes/flink-1.17/`.

Ron, Rui Fan, Ryan Skraba, Salva Alcántara, Samrat, Samrat Deb, Samrat002,
Sebastian Mattheis, Sergey Nuyanzin, Seth Saperstein, Shengkai, Shuiqiang Chen,
Smirnov Alexander, Sriram Ganesh, Steven van Rossum, Tartarus0zm, Timo Walther,
Venkata krishnan Sowrirajan, Wei Zhong, Weihua Hu, Weijie Guo, Xianxun Ye,
Xintong Song, Yash Mayya, YasuoStudyJava, Yu Chen, Yubin Li, Yufan Sheng, Yun
Gao, Yun Tang, Yuxin Tan, Zakelly, Zhanghao Chen, Zhenqiu Huang, Zhu Zhu,
ZmmBigdata, bzhaoopenstack, chengshuo.cs, chenxujun, chenyuzhi, chenyuzhi459,
chenzihao, dependabot[bot], fanrui, fengli, frankeshi, fredia, godfreyhe,
gongzhongqiang, harker2015, hehuiyuan, hiscat, huangxingbo, hunter-cloud09,
ifndef-SleePy, jeremyber-aws, jiangjiguang, jingge, kevin.cyj, kristoffSC, kurt,
laughingman7743, libowen, lincoln lee, lincoln.lil, liujiangang, liujingmao,
liuyongvs, liuzhuang2017, luoyuxia, mas-chen, moqimoqidea, muggleChen, noelo,
ouyangwulin, ramkrish86, saikikun, sammieliu, shihong90, shuiqiangchen,
snuyanzin, sunxia, sxnan, tison, todd5167, tonyzhu918, wangfeifan, wenbingshen,
xuyang, yiksanchan, yunfengzhou-hub, yunhong, yuxia Luo, yuzelin, zhangjingcun,

> zhangmang, zhengyunhong.zyh, zhouli, zoucao, 沈嘉琦, 1996fanrui

Reviewer 3: I think `1996fanrui` and `Rui Fan` is the same guy.

Author: They owned same mail <1996fanrui@gmail.com>, I'll use `Rui Fan`

---
authors:
- LeonardXu:
  name: "Leonard Xu"
  twitter: Leonardxbj
date: "2023-03-09T08:00:00Z" #FIXME: Change to the actual release date, also the date in the filename, and the directory name of linked images
subtitle: ""
title: Announcing the Release of Apache Flink 1.17
aliases:
- /news/2023/03/09/release-1.17.0.html #FIXME: Change to the actual release date
---

The Apache Flink PMC is pleased to announce Apache Flink release 1.17.0. Apache
Flink is the leading stream processing standard, and the concept of unified
stream and batch data processing is being successfully adopted in more and more
companies. Thanks to our excellent community and contributors, Apache Flink
continues to grow as a technology and remains one of the most active projects in
the Apache Software Foundation. Flink 1.17 had 172 contributors enthusiastically
participating and saw the completion of 7 FLIPs and 600+ issues, bringing many
exciting new features and improvements to the community.

> # Towards Streaming Warehouses

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
# Towards Streaming Warehouse
```

Author: It's better to use plural form here to express multiple warehouses

Reviewer 5: Warehouse mean the concept itself. There should be one unique streaming warehouse. There is any description in the upcoming content pointing out multiple warehouses (multiple concepts)?

Author: You can refer release 1.16  as well

In order to achieve greater efficiency in the realm of [streaming
warehouse](https://www.alibabacloud.com/blog/more-than-computing-a-new-era-led-by-the-warehouse-architecture-of-apache-flink_598821),
Flink 1.17 contains substantial improvements to both the performance of batch
processing and the semantics of streaming processing. These improvements
represent a significant stride towards the creation of a more efficient and
streamlined data warehouse, capable of processing large quantities of data in
real-time.

For batch processing, this release includes several new features and
improvements:

* **Streaming Warehouse API:**
  [FLIP-282](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/pages/viewpage.action?pageId=235838061)

>   introduces the new Delete and Update API in Flink SQL which only works in batch

Reviewer 6: Is this feature documented yet? I didn't find any mention of row level deletion in the SQL documentation. In my understanding this relies on the source/sinks to implement the capability, right? Can we mention which sources/sinks already support it?

Author: No implemented connector  yet, so only API here

>   introduces the new Delete and Update API in Flink SQL which works in(only) batch

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  introduces the new Delete and Update API in Flink SQL which (only) works in batch
```

Author: It's a minor change, and I adopted @XComp 's comment， I will  improve this

  mode. External storage systems like Flink Table Store can implement row-level

>   updates via this new API. The ALTER TABLE syntax is enhanced by including the

Reviewer 7: nit
```suggestion
  modification via this new API. The ALTER TABLE syntax is enhanced by including the
```

  ability to ADD/MODIFY/DROP columns, primary keys, and watermarks, making it
  easier for users to maintain their table schema.

> * **Batch Execution Improvements:** Execution of batch workloads has been

Reviewer 6: We are using a lot of quite complex and newer Flink concepts in this paragraph. Can we add links to the respective documention and Jira tickets, so that users can more easily read up on it?

Author: 👍🏻，will add the links

  significantly improved in Flink 1.17 in terms of performance, stability and

>   usability. Performance wise, a 26% TPC-DS improvement is achieved with

Reviewer 8: a 26% TPC-DS improvement on 10T dataset

  is introduced to inform of potential correctness risks and optimization
  suggestions to SQL users.
* **Checkpoint Improvements:** The generic incremental checkpoint improvements
  enhance the speed and stability of the checkpoint procedure, and the unaligned
  checkpoint has improved stability under backpressure and is production-ready
  in Flink 1.17. Users can manually trigger checkpoints with self-defined
  checkpoint types while a job is running with the newly introduced REST
  interface for triggering checkpoints.
* **Watermark Alignment Enhancement:** Efficient watermark processing directly
  affects the execution efficiency of event time applications. In Flink 1.17,
  [FLIP-217](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/FLINK/FLIP-217%3A+Support+watermark+alignment+of+source+splits)
  introduces an improvement to watermark alignment by aligning data emission
  across splits within a source operator. This improvement results in more
  efficient coordination of watermark progress in the source, which in turn
  mitigates excessive buffering by downstream operators and enhances the overall

>   efficiency of steaming job execution.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  efficiency of steaming job execution. In this release, only Kafka and Pulsar connectors support this features.
```

Reviewer 5: I am wondering if the Flink doc[1] should be updated and consistent with the announcement. 

[1] https://github.com/apache/flink/blob/release-1.17/docs/content/docs/dev/datastream/event-time/generating_watermarks.md?plain=1#L308

Author: I think you can open a doc issue to fix the outdated doc.

section.

## TPC-DS Benchmark

Starting with Flink 1.16, the performance of the Batch engine has continuously
been optimized. In Flink 1.16, dynamic partition pruning was introduced, but not
all TPC-DS queries could be optimized. In Flink 1.17, the algorithm has been
improved, and most of the TPC-DS results are now optimized. In Flink 1.17, a
dynamic programming join-reorder algorithm is introduced, which has a better
working, larger search space compared to the previous algorithm.. The planner
can automatically select the appropriate join-reorder algorithm based on the
number of joins in a query, so that users don’t have to care about the join-reorder 
algorithms. (Note: the join-reorder is disabled by default, and you need
to enable it when running TPC-DS.) In the operator layer, dynamic hash local
aggregation strategy is introduced, which can dynamically determine according to
the data distribution whether the local hash aggregation operation is needed to
improve performance. In the runtime layer, some unnecessary virtual function
calls are removed to speed up the execution. Summarized, Flink 1.17 has a 26%

> performance improvement compared to Flink 1.16.

Reviewer 8: Summarized, Flink 1.17 has a 26% performance improvement compared to Flink 1.16 on 10T dataset for partitioned table.

</center>
<!-- FIXME: Change to the actual release date -->

## SQL Client / Gateway

Apache Flink 1.17 introduces a new feature called "gateway mode" for the SQL
Client, which enhances its functionality by allowing it to connect to a remote
gateway and submit SQL queries like it does in embedded mode. This new mode
offers users much more convenience when working with the SQL Gateway.

In addition, the SQL Client/SQL Gateway now provides new support for managing
job lifecycles through SQL statements. Users can use SQL statements to display
all job information stored in the JobManager and stop running jobs using their
unique job IDs. With this new feature, SQL Client/Gateway now has almost the
same functionality as Flink CLI, making it another powerful tool for managing
Flink jobs.

## SQL API

Row-Level SQL Delete & Update are becoming more and more important in modern big
data workflows. The use cases include deleting a set of rows for regulatory
compliance, updating a set of rows for data correction, etc. Many popular
engines such as Trino or Hive have supported them. In Flink 1.17, the new Delete &
Update API is introduced in Flink, which works in batch mode and is exposed to

> connectors. Now external storage systems can implement row-level updates via

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
connectors. Now external storage systems can implement row-level modification via
```

capabilities provide users with the flexibility to maintain their table schema
metadata according to their needs.

## Hive Compatibility

Apache Flink 1.17 brings new improvements to the Hive table sink, making it more
efficient than ever before. In previous versions, the Hive table sink only
supported automatic file compaction in streaming mode, but not in batch mode. In
Flink 1.17, the Hive table sink can now automatically compact newly written files
in batch mode as well. This feature can greatly reduce the number of small files.
Also, for using Hive built-in functions via
[HiveModule](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.17/docs/connectors/table/hive/hive_functions/),
Flink introduces several native Hive aggregation functions including
SUM/COUNT/AVG/MIN/MAX to HiveModule. These functions can be executed using the
hash-based aggregation operator and then bring significant performance
improvements.

# Streaming Processing

In Flink 1.17, difficult Streaming SQL semantics and correctness issues are
addressed, checkpoint performance is optimized, watermark alignment is enhanced,
Streaming FileSink expands ABFS support, Calcite and FRocksDB have been upgraded

> to newer versions. This further consolidates our leading position in the field

Reviewer 6: I would scratch "This further ...". This is for others to decide, not for us.

Author: How about "These improvements further enhance the capabilities of Flink in the field of stream processing" ?

[FLINK-29849](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-29849),
[FLINK-30006](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-30006), and
[FLINK-30841](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-30841).

## Checkpoint Improvements 

Generic Incremental Checkpoint (GIC) aims to improve the speed and stability of
the checkpoint procedure. Some experimental results in the WordCount case are
shown as below. More details can be found in this [blog
post](https://www.ververica.com/blog/generic-log-based-incremental-checkpoint). 

Table1: Benefits after enabling GIC in WordCount case

<center>
<img src="/img/blog/2023-03-09-release-1.17.0/beneifts-after-enabling-gic-in-wordcount-case.png" style="width:90%;margin:15px">
</center>
<!-- FIXME: Change to the actual release date -->

Table2: Costs after enabling GIC in WordCount case

<center>
<img src="/img/blog/2023-03-09-release-1.17.0/costs-after-enabling-gic-in-wordcount-case.png" style="width:90%;margin:15px">
</center>
<!-- FIXME: Change to the actual release date -->

Unaligned Checkpoints (UC) greatly increase the completed ratio of checkpoints
under backpressure. The previous UC implementation would write many small files

> which may cause high load for the namenode of HDFS. In this release, this problem

Reviewer 6: I suggest to use a more generic term like "blob storage service". At least in my experience, hardly anyone uses HDFS for checkpoints anymore.

Author: it's hard to say "namenode of blob storage service", each blob storage service has its own metadata management, so use the open source FS to explain the UC's small file issue(mainly for metadata system) is fine for me.

manually to break the incremental checkpoint chain to avoid referring to files
from a long time ago.

## Watermark Alignment Support

In earlier versions, [FLIP-182](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/FLINK/FLIP-182%3A+Support+watermark+alignment+of+FLIP-27+Sources)
proposed a solution called watermark alignment to tackle the issue of data skew
in event time applications caused by imbalanced sources. However, it had a 
limitation that the source parallelism had to match the number of splits. This
was because a source operator with multiple splits might need to buffer a
considerable amount of data if one split emitted data faster than another. To
address this limitation, Flink 1.17 introduced [FLIP-217](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/FLINK/FLIP-217%3A+Support+watermark+alignment+of+source+splits),
which enhances watermark alignment to align data emission across splits within
a source operator while considering watermark boundaries. This enhancement
ensures more coordinated watermark progress in the source, preventing downstream
operators from buffering excessive data and improving the execution efficiency of
streaming jobs. 

## Streaming FileSink Expansion

> Following the addition of ABFS support, the

Reviewer 6: Does everyone know what "ABFS" is? I had to google it.

  across splits within a source operator. This improvement results in more
  efficient coordination of watermark progress in the source, which in turn
  mitigates excessive buffering by downstream operators and enhances the overall
  efficiency of steaming job execution.
* **StateBackend Upgrade:** The updated version of
  [FRocksDB](https://github.com/ververica/frocksdb) to 6.20.3-ververica-2.0
  brings improvements to RocksDBStateBackend like sharing memory between slots,
  and now supports Apple Silicon chipsets like the Mac M1.

# Batch processing

As a unified stream and batch data processing engine, Flink stands out
particularly in the field of stream processing. In order to improve its batch
processing capabilities, the community contributors put in a lot of effort to
improve Flink's batch performance and ecosystem in version 1.17. This makes it
easier for users to build a streaming warehouse based on Flink.

## Speculative Execution

Speculative execution for sinks is now supported. Previously, speculative
execution was not enabled for sinks to avoid instability or incorrect results.
In Flink 1.17, the context of sinks are improved so that sinks, including [new

> sinks](https://github.com/apache/flink/blob/master//flink-core/src/main/java/org/apache/flink/api/connector/sink2/Sink.java)

Reviewer 3: I suggest to use `github.com/apache/flink/blob/release-1.17` based links to replace `github.com/apache/flink/blob/master` based ones. Thus we can always refer to the correct links in the future.
This is the same for the below links.

more details.

This release also widens the scope of sharing memory between slots to
TaskManager, which can help to increase the memory efficiency if the memory
usage of slots in a TaskManager is uneven. Furthermore, it can reduce the
overall memory consumption at the expense of resource isolation after tuning.
Read more about
[state.backend.rocksdb.memory.fixed-per-tm](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.17/docs/deployment/config/#state-backend-rocksdb-memory-fixed-per-tm)
configuration. 

## Calcite Upgrade

Flink 1.17 is upgraded to [Calcite](https://calcite.apache.org/) version 1.29.0
to improve the performance and efficiency of the Flink SQL system. Flink 1.16
uses Calcite 1.26.0 which has severe issues with RexNode simplification caused
by the SEARCH operator. This leads to wrong data from query optimization as
reported in [CALCITE-4325](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/CALCITE-4325) and [
CALCITE-4352](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/CALCITE-4352). By upgrading
the version of Calcite, Flink can take advantage of its improved
performance and new features in Flink SQL processing. This resolves multiple

> bugs and leads to faster query processing times. The downside of this upgrade is

Reviewer 9: As suggested in the discussion of apache/flink#22146, what about removing the statement `The downside of this upgrade is that the execution plan changes for certain SQL queries. Savepoints are not backwards compatible in these cases` ? This incompatibility should have already been highlighted in the [doc](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-master/docs/dev/table/concepts/overview/#stateful-upgrades-and-evolution) and the coming release note of 1.17.

Author: Make sense to me
